Add Technical Updates to the newsletter draft (#27)
substrate-developer-hub/newsletter: draft/2023-06-substrate-newsletter.md

---

### [#14149](https://github.com/paritytech/substrate/pull/14149) Introduce `entropy` function into frame System

**Summary**

The code change introduces a stateless function that generates a unique identifier for use in XCM and potentially other areas of the ecosystem.

---

### [#14144](https://github.com/paritytech/substrate/pull/14144) Actually respect locks of zero

**Summary**

`set_lock` should not be a no-op when locking zero funds.

---

### [#14108](https://github.com/paritytech/substrate/pull/14108) frame: Enable GenesisConfig in no_std

**Summary**

The code change enables `GenesisConfig` compilation in `no_std` environment and provides a `Default` implementation for `GenesisConfig` required for no_std in no-native runtime world.

---

### [#14106](https://github.com/paritytech/substrate/pull/14106) Timeout only if the referendum is not queued

**Summary**

The code change ensures that a referendum is only cancelled if the deciding deposit is not paid and the timeout elapses, rather than being cancelled regardless of whether it is queued or not.

---

### [#14070](https://github.com/paritytech/substrate/pull/14070) Add `Blocked` Account Status to Assets Pallet

> **Description**
> 
> Introducing the asset account state of `Blocked`, that is `Frozen` + ineligible to receive funds of the asset.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Summary**

This PR adds an asset account state of `Blocked` when it is `Frozen` and unable to receive funds of the asset.

```

> requires https://github.com/paritytech/substrate/pull/13843

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

---

### [#14052](https://github.com/paritytech/substrate/pull/14052) add pallet macro kitchensink example/template

**Summary**

> The PR adds a new pallet that showcases all `#[pallet::xxx]` macros and their usage. It is related to issue #13951 and was used to create issue #14053. It is accompanied by another PR that aims to improve documentation for these macros.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The PR adds a new pallet that showcases all `#[pallet::xxx]` macros and their usage.
```

---

### [#14024](https://github.com/paritytech/substrate/pull/14024) pallet-aura: Allow multiple blocks per slot

**Summary**

The code change allows sequential blocks to be authored within the same slot, which will be useful for backlog of blocks and future roadmap items like elastic scaling and parallel block production. The update guide suggests setting the new `AllowMultipleBlocksPerSlot` to `false` to maintain current behavior.

---

### [#13993](https://github.com/paritytech/substrate/pull/13993) BREAKING - Try-runtime: Use proper error types

**Summary**

This PR updates the return types of several hooks and introduces a new type called `TryRuntimeError` which is an alias to `DispatchError`. The hooks should no longer use `assert!` and instead return `TryRuntimeError` in case of an error. Existing error variants can be used, but if there isn't one, `&'static str` should be used which will be converted to `TryRuntimeError` during compile time.

---

### [#13958](https://github.com/paritytech/substrate/pull/13958) Take into account proof size for transaction payment and priority

**Summary**

> The code changes will now take into account the proof size while adjusting the fee, which will prevent an attacker from filling the block with storage size without paying an appropriate fee. The PR also considers proof size for calculation of transaction priority. Care needs to be taken to set the max PoV size for a chain to ensure optimal block fullness based on each weight dimension.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The code changes will now take into account the proof size while adjusting the fee in the Transaction Payment pallet, which will prevent an attacker from filling the block with storage size without paying an appropriate fee. The PR also considers proof size for calculation of transaction priority. Care needs to be taken to set the max PoV size for a chain to ensure optimal block fullness based on each weight dimension.
```

---

### [#13869](https://github.com/paritytech/substrate/pull/13869) HoldReason: Improve usage

**Summary**

> The `HoldReason` attribute was recently switched to use the `composite_enum` attribute, which requires changes to downstream code. The proper implementation is to use the `HoldReason` from inside the pallet directly when calling `hold`. The `HoldIdentifier` in `pallet_balances::Config` trait needs to be changed to `RuntimeHoldReason`, and `HoldReason` needs to be removed from `pallet_nis::Config` and replaced with `RuntimeHoldReason`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `HoldReason` attribute was recently switched to use the `composite_enum` attribute, which requires changes to downstream code. This PR adds `RuntimeHoldReason` as type to the Config trait and requires that Currency is uses the same reason. With this update, `HoldReason` needs to be removed from `pallet_nis::Config` and replaced with `RuntimeHoldReason`. For the `pallet_balances::Config` trait you need to change `HoldIdentifier` to `RuntimeHoldReason` and pass the `RuntimeHoldReason` that is being generated by construct_runtime!.
```

---

### [#13843](https://github.com/paritytech/substrate/pull/13843) Allow Creation of Asset Accounts That Don't Exist Yet and Add `Blocked` Status

**Summary**

The code changes add new dispatchables for creating and refunding accounts with zero balance in an asset class, represented by a new variant. A new trait is added to allow other pallets to create an account. A new account status of "Blocked" is also added, which prevents both withdrawals and deposits, and can be returned to its unrestricted state via the existing "thaw" function.

---

### [#13705](https://github.com/paritytech/substrate/pull/13705) Deprecate Pallet `decl_*` Macros

**Summary**

The code changes involve deprecating `decl_module`, `decl_storage`, `decl_error`, and `decl_event` and migrating any remaining usage to `#[frame_support::pallet]`. There are related issues and pull requests that these changes depend on.

---

### [#13454](https://github.com/paritytech/substrate/pull/13454) [FRAME Core] Default Pallet Config Trait / derive_impl

**Summary**

> This PR adds the ability for a pallet to define one or more defaults for its trait Config via #[pallet::config(with_default)]. Then, when writing impl Config for Runtime, one of these defaults can be used to elide any missing type item via #[derive_impl(path_to_default_impl)]. At the moment, this is limited to type items that do not rely on frame_system::Config. This PR also adds several attribute proc macros to frame_support, most notably #[derive_impl(..)] and #[register_default_impl(..)], which in tandem make it possible to create trait impls that provide sane defaults and dynamically inject the non-colliding trait items from these impls into downstream trait impls that want to use the sane defaults but potentially override some of them.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This PR adds the ability for a pallet to define one or more defaults for its trait Config via `#[pallet::config(with_default)]`. Then, when writing `impl Config for Runtime`, one of these defaults can be used to elide any missing type item via `#[derive_impl(path_to_default_impl)]`. At the moment, this is limited to type items that do not rely on `frame_system::Config`. This PR also adds several attribute proc macros to frame_support, most notably `#[derive_impl(..)]` and `#[register_default_impl(..)]`, which in tandem make it possible to create trait impls that provide sane defaults and dynamically inject the non-colliding trait items from these impls into downstream trait impls that want to use the sane defaults but potentially override some of them.
```

---

### [#13417](https://github.com/paritytech/substrate/pull/13417) Improve handling of unset `StorageVersion`

**Summary**

This code change ensures that if a user forgets to set the storage version in a pallet and calls `current_storage_version`, it will fail to compile the code. It also checks in `post_upgrade` that the pallet storage version was upgraded and no migration was missed. However, this may cause `try-runtime` tests to fail, which can be fixed by setting the storage version using a simple migration.

---

### [#13373](https://github.com/paritytech/substrate/pull/13373) Create benchmark for the `system::set_code` instrisic

**Summary**

> The code changes benchmark `system::set_code` by timing uncompression and setting the *kitchensink* runtime to determine an upper bound. It is a fix for issue #13192.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The code changes benchmark `system::set_code` by timing uncompression and setting the *kitchensink* runtime to determine an upper bound.
```

---

### [#13031](https://github.com/paritytech/substrate/pull/13031) arkworks integration

**Summary**

This PR adds host function calls for elliptic curve arithmetic used by Arkworks to the sp_crypto_ec_utils crate. The host calls are for bls12_381, bls12_377, ed_on_bls12_381, ed_on_bls12_77, bw6_761. The host functions receive their arguments serialized to `Vec<u8>` by ark-scale and return the result as serialized `Result<Vec<u8>, ()>`, which then needs to be deserialized by `ark-scale`. The curves are defined in the https://github.com/paritytech/ark-substrate repo and receive the host functions by dependency injection. Tests are covered by pulling in https://github.com/paritytech/ark-substrate where we instantiate the `ark-substrate` curves, which receive the sp-io host function implementations by dependency injection. The PR could be further optimized by adding more curves and replacing more operations by host function calls.

---

### [#11324](https://github.com/paritytech/substrate/pull/11324) Society v2

**Summary**

> The changes to Society include the removal of technical limitations on the number of members, proper use of BoundedVec, and the ability for the founder to alter max members and intake size without a runtime upgrade. Members are ranked and voting weight is determined by rank. The candidate voting process is now a two-phase process, and the voting/reward/punishment scheme for candidates and challenged members is completely different. New dispatchables have been added to the UI.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The changes to Society pallet include the removal of technical limitations on the number of members, proper use of `BoundedVec`, and the ability for the founder to alter max members and intake size without a runtime upgrade. Members are ranked and voting weight is determined by rank. The candidate voting process is now a two-phase process, and the voting/reward/punishment scheme for candidates and challenged members is completely different.
```

---

## Node SDK

Here are note-worthy **Node SDK** PRs in Substrate repo merged between 2023-05-01 and 2023-06-23.

### [#14391](https://github.com/paritytech/substrate/pull/14391) expose setting kademlia replication factor through node CLI

**Summary**

The code change exposes the ability to set the Kademlia replication factor through the node's CLI, which is useful in test environments where the default replication factor of 20 may cause issues with `AuthorityDiscovery`.

---

### [#14285](https://github.com/paritytech/substrate/pull/14285) sc-transaction-pool: Always use best block to check if we should skip enactment

**Summary**

The tree route will be calculated against the best block and used to determine if checks should be skipped.

---

### [#14252](https://github.com/paritytech/substrate/pull/14252) sp-api: Set correct where bound in the generated code

**Summary**

> The code fix corrects the where bound for the `create_metadata` function by using the where bound declared at the type declaration augmented with the manual where bound. It closes an issue on GitHub.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The code fix corrects the where bound for the `create_metadata` function by using the where bound declared at the type declaration augmented with the manual where bound.
```

---

### [#14236](https://github.com/paritytech/substrate/pull/14236) Incorporate `sc-peerset` into `sc-network`

**Summary**

> The code changes involve moving `Peerset`, `PeerStore`, and `ProtocolController` from `sc-peerset` to `sc-network` & `sc-network-common` in preparation for an upcoming issue. The `B1-note_worthy` label is added because the `sc-peerset` crate is retired.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The code changes involve moving `Peerset`, `PeerStore`, and `ProtocolController` from `sc-peerset` to `sc-network` & `sc-network-common` in preparation for [#14170](https://github.com/paritytech/substrate/issues/14170). The `B1-note_worthy` label is added because the `sc-peerset` crate is retired.
```

**Summary**

A new `OffchainTransactionPoolFactory` is introduced to create offchain transaction pools that can be registered in the runtime externalities context, which will simplify the creation of offchain transaction pools in a future PR.

---

### [#14191](https://github.com/paritytech/substrate/pull/14191) TrieCache: Fine tune the size of the local and node cache

**Summary**

The code changes increase the size of the local cache to 10MiB and give the node cache a bigger max size than the value cache to ensure caching of `:code` and prevent it from being thrown out of the cache due to size limitations. Future improvements are planned to prevent certain values, such as `:code`, from being removed from the cache at all.

---

### [#14190](https://github.com/paritytech/substrate/pull/14190) WarpSync: Show number of required peers in informant

**Summary**

The change makes it clearer to the user what the system is waiting for, instead of just saying "waiting for peers".

---

### [#14182](https://github.com/paritytech/substrate/pull/14182) RevertCmd: Expose database params via CLI

**Summary**

> The code change exposes database parameters for `RevertCmd` via CLI, allowing users to use `revert` with ParityDb. It also closes an issue on GitHub.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The code change exposes database parameters for `RevertCmd` via CLI, allowing users to use `revert` with ParityDb.
```

---

### [#14094](https://github.com/paritytech/substrate/pull/14094) sc-informant: Do not show `Block history` if doing major sync

**Summary**

This code change fixes an issue where a node would need to do a major sync to sync to the tip of the chain if it was stopped and started while downloading block history, even after warp syncing. The change also updates the sync state displayed by Informant.

---

### [#13999](https://github.com/paritytech/substrate/pull/13999) Manual seal delayed finalize

**Summary**

> The code changes add delayed block finalization for instant block sealing consensus, which is needed for local development nodes such as substrate-contract-node and swanky-node. Frontend development requires the ability to configure the delayed time for block finalization after blocks are imported. An integration example for an actual node can be found in a pull request.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The code changes add delayed block finalization for instant block sealing consensus, which is needed for local development nodes such as substrate-contract-node and swanky-node. Frontend development requires the ability to configure the delayed time for block finalization after blocks are imported. An integration example for an actual node can be found [here](https://github.com/AstarNetwork/swanky-node/pull/61).
```

---

### [#13800](https://github.com/paritytech/substrate/pull/13800) Remove wasmi backend from sc-executor

**Summary**

> The pull request removes the `wasmi` backend, making the runtime execution exclusively `wasmtime`. It also closes issue #13496.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This PR removes the `wasmi` backend, making the runtime execution exclusively `wasmtime`.
```

---

### [#13701](https://github.com/paritytech/substrate/pull/13701) Statement store

**Summary**

This code change implements a feature for calculating statement count/size limit per account, adding a channel field to allow replacing statements, reintroducing a priority field, and removing time-based statement expiration. Encryption and API for reporting statistics are still left to do in follow-up PRs. There are also links to related PRs for polkadot and cumulus companions.

---

### [#13384](https://github.com/paritytech/substrate/pull/13384) rpc server: break legacy CLI options and remove "backward compatible HTTP server"

**Summary**

> The code changes involve removing or renaming several CLI options in Substrate, including --rpc--max--payload, --ws--max--out-buffer-capacity, --ws-external, --unsafe--ws--external, --ipc--path, --ws-port, --ws-max--connections, --rpc-http, and --rpc-ws. These changes are reflected in the Polkadot and Cumulus companions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The code changes involve removing or renaming several CLI options in Substrate, including `--rpc--max--payload`, `--ws--max--out-buffer-capacity`, `--ws-external`, `--unsafe--ws--external`, `--ipc--path`, `--ws-port`, `--ws-max--connections`, `--rpc-http`, and `--rpc-ws`. These changes are reflected in the Polkadot and Cumulus companions.
```
